Documentation - Extending Wagtail client-side with Stimulus (#10590)
wagtail/wagtail: docs/extending/extending_client_side.md

The simplest way to attach behaviour to the browser is via [DOM Events](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Events) and plain (vanilla) JavaScript.

### Wagtail's custom DOM events

Wagtail supports some custom behaviour via listening or dispatching custom DOM events.

-   See [Images title generation on upload](images_title_generation_on_upload).
-   See [Documents title generation on upload](docs_title_generation_on_upload).

(extending_client_side_stimulus)=

## Extending with Stimulus

Wagtail uses [Stimulus](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/) as a way to provide lightweight client-side interactivity or custom JavaScript widgets within the admin interface.

The key benefit of using Stimulus is that your code can avoid the need for manual initialisation when widgets appear dynamically, such as within modals, `InlinePanel`, or `StreamField` panels.

The [Stimulus handbook](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/handbook/introduction) is the best source on how to work with and understand Stimulus.

### Adding a custom Stimulus controller

Wagtail exposes two client-side globals for using Stimulus.

> 1. `window.stimulusApp` the an instance of the core admin Stimulus application.

Reviewer: "~~the~~ an"

Author: Thanks, fixed this and a few other grammar typos found by Grammarly.

2. `window.Stimulus` Stimulus module as exported from `@hotwired/stimulus`.

> You need to first create a custom [Stimulus controller](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/controllers) which will the base `window.Stimulus.Controller` using class inheritance. If you are using a build tool you can extend `import { Controller } from '@hotwired/stimulus';`.

Reviewer: "which will the base `window.Stimulus.Controller` using class inheritance." => "which should extend `window.Stimulus.Controller` using class inheritance."

Author: Thanks, went with a slightly different wording of this whole paragraph, hopefully reads better now.

Many kinds of common customisations can be done without reaching into JavaScript.
You do not need to know or use these libraries to add your custom behaviour to elements and in many cases vanilla (plain) JavaScript will work fine.
However, Stimulus is the recommended approach for anything that vanilla JavaScript cannot do.
You do not need to have Node.js tooling running for your custom Wagtail installation for many customisations built on these libraries.
In some cases, such as building packages, it may make more complex development easier though.

```{note}
It is recommended that you avoid using jQuery as this will be removed in a future version of Wagtail.
```

(extending_client_side_injecting_javascript)=

## Adding custom JavaScript

Within Wagtail's admin interface, there are a few ways to add JavaScript.

The simplest way is to add global JavaScript files via hooks, see [](insert_editor_js) and [](insert_global_admin_js).

> For JavaScript added when a specific Widget is used you can add an inner `Media` class to ensure that the file is loaded when the widget is used, see [Django form Media](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/forms/media/#assets-as-a-static-definition).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For JavaScript added when a specific Widget is used you can add an inner `Media` class to ensure that the file is loaded when the widget is used, see [Django's docs on their form `Media` class](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/forms/media/#assets-as-a-static-definition).
```

Author: Much better thanks.

(extending_client_side)=

# Extending client-side behaviour

Many kinds of common customisations can be done without reaching into JavaScript, but depending on what parts of the client-side interaction you want to leverage or customise, you may need to employ React, Stimulus, or vanilla (plain) JS.

[React](https://reactjs.org/) is used for more complex parts of Wagtail, such as the sidebar, commenting system, and the Draftail rich-text editor.
For basic JavaScript-driven interaction, Wagtail is migrating towards [Stimulus](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/).

You don't need to know or use these libraries to add your custom behaviour to elements, and in many cases vanilla (plain) JavaScript will work fine, but Stimulus is the recommended approach for anything that vanilla JavaScript can't do.

You don't need to have Node.js tooling running for your custom Wagtail installation for many customisations built on these libraries, but in some cases, such as building packages, it may make more complex development easier.

```{note}

> it's recommended that you avoid using jQuery as this will be removed in a future version of Wagtail.

Reviewer 3: If we have this kind of long-term note I feel like we might as well make it a clear-cut "don’t".

```suggestion
Avoid using jQuery and any undocumented jQuery plugins, as they will be removed in a future version of Wagtail.
```

In a similar way, Wagtail's [template components](template_components) provide a `media` property or `Media` class to add scripts when rendered.

These will ensure the added files are used in the admin after the core JavaScript admin files are already loaded.

(extending_client_side_using_events)=

## Extending with DOM events

When approaching client-side customisations or adopting new components, try to keep the implementation simple first, you may not need any knowledge of Stimulus, React, JavaScript Modules or a build system to achieve your goals.

The simplest way to attach behaviour to the browser is via DOM Events and plain (vanilla) JavaScript.

For example, if you want to attach some logic to a field value change in Wagtail you can add an event listener, check if it's the correct element and change what you need.

```javascript
// myapp/static/js/events.js
document.addEventListener('change', function (event) {

>     if (event.target) {

Reviewer 3: This feels dated to me to add global event listeners to interact with a single field. Is this so people can implement those changes without worrying about the execution order of the JS initialisation?

Author: The idea is that JS integrations do not need to be complex and event listeners are an elegant, simple, maintainable way to get many kinds of customisations working. 

Additionally, it paves the way for Stimulus usage which is built on Events as first class citizens.

I'd also push back a bit on event listeners being dated, I think it's a very useful way to add behaviour that the browser is built around.

Reviewer 4: I think Thibaud's point is about global event listeners, not event listeners in general. Adding global event listeners to specific elements should be fine, but adding event listeners to the document element means that the function is executed even when the event comes from an element that is not of the function's concerns (which I think is what Thibaud meant by "wasteful" in another comment).

There are cases where this is useful, e.g. capturing a "click away", but in most cases I don't think it's a good idea to advise this.

Author: Thanks both, I will just remove this example and keep this section short and generic.

The underlying goal is to remind developers that they may not need to reach for a complex solution when something simple may get the job done.

        console.log('field has changed', event.target);
    }
});
```

Alternatively, you can write JavaScript logic to achieve this by listening to all click events and checking if the clicked element corresponds to the comments section.

```javascript
// myapp/static/js/events.js

> document.addEventListener('click', function (event) {
>     if (!event.target) return;
> 
>     isCommentsToggle = event.target.matches(
>         '[data-side-panel-toggle="comments"]',
>     );

Reviewer 3: I’m finding this problematic for the above reason (executing JS on every click seems wasteful / dated), and also because we’re now document those `data-` attributes as things you can rely on in your customisation. I’d prefer we stuck to documented parts of Wagtail, or at least examples that are less tied to our implementation details.

If we keep this,

```suggestion
document.addEventListener('click', function (event) {
    if (!event.target) return;

    const isCommentsToggle = event.target.matches(
        '[data-side-panel-toggle="comments"]',
    );
```

Author: I'll try to think of a better example here. I agree we probably don't want to highlight this data attribute specifically. 

However, as above, I'd push back on this being dated. Remember the target audience is people trying to solve things they cannot solve with html / Python alone.

Author: As per comment above, will remove this example, keep it generic and just focus on the goal of reminding devs that Events exist.

    if (!isCommentsToggle) return;
    console.log('Comments have been toggled');
});
```

Then, you can register this with the `insert_global_admin_js` hook.

```python
# myapp/wagtail_hooks.py
from django.templatetags.static import static
from django.utils.safestring import mark_safe

from wagtail import hooks

@hooks.register('insert_global_admin_js')
def global_admin_js():
    return mark_safe(
        f'<script src="{static("js/events.js")}"></script>',
    )
```

### Wagtail's custom DOM events

> -   Wagtail supports some custom behaviour via listening or dispatching custom DOM events, usually with the prefix `wagtail:` or `w-` for specific Stimulus controllers.

Reviewer 3: Here I think my preference would be to document the specific events we want people to reuse, rather than setting a pattern of allowing reliance on any and all DOM events with those prefixes. It feels like too much busywork for us to treat all prefixed DOM events as needing to remain API-compatible. If an event is important enough for third-party customisations, then I think having it explicitly named and described in the docs is a good baseline.

Author: Great, I'll remove this.

-   See [Images title generation on upload](images_title_generation_on_upload).
-   See [Documents title generation on upload](docs_title_generation_on_upload).

(extending_client_side_stimulus)=

## Extending with Stimulus

> Wagtail uses [Stimulus](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/) as a way to provide lightweight client-side interactivity where React isn't required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Wagtail uses [Stimulus](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/) as a way to provide lightweight client-side interactivity.
```

> You can use Stimulus to easily build custom JavaScript widgets within the admin interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use Stimulus to build custom JavaScript widgets within the admin interface.
```

> The key benefit of using Stimulus is that your code can avoid the need for manual initialisation when widgets appear dynamically in the browser. Such as within modals, `InlinePanels` or `StreamField` panels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The key benefit of using Stimulus is that your code can avoid the need for manual initialisation when widgets appear dynamically in the browser. Such as within modals, `InlinePanel`, or `StreamField` panels.
```

Author: Thanks

> ### Understanding the basics of Stimulus

Reviewer 3: I don’t get why we have all of this in our docs. Wouldn’t people be better off by just looking at the Stimulus docs?

Author: Yeah, I struggled with this. I found myself referencing Stimulus concepts later and it felt like I should have some basics on this page.

My reasoning is the audience could get away with getting something custom working and understood without reading an external page. 

Happy to remove this completely and just direct people to the Stimulus docs.

#### [Values](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/values)

Values are both the initial HTML-driven data for controllers and allow stateful/reactive behaviour. You must declare a value type and an optional default within your controller.
Values are declared in the initial HTML on the controlled element with the `data-...-value` attribute, for example `<section data-controller="my-controller" data-my-controller-delay-value="300">...</section>`.

#### [Actions](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/actions)

A simple and powerful way to attach DOM event listeners to any element within your controlled element, letting you react to events such as `click` or `hover` and triggering a Controller method. No JavaScript is needed for this, it's all declarative in your HTML and Stimulus will clean up event listeners for you.

The `data-action` attribute is used, for example `<button type="button" data-action="click->my-controller#open">Open</button>`, where `click` is the event, separated by an `->` and then the controller's identifier with a `#methodName`.

### Adding a custom Stimulus controller

> Wagtail exposes a single client-side global (`window.Stimulus`), which is an instance of the core admin Stimulus application.

Reviewer 3: How about we instead expose two globals?

```js
import * as Stimulus from "@hotwired/stimulus"

window.Stimulus = Stimulus;
window.stimulusApp = Stimulus.Application.start();
```

This goes against the examples in the Stimulus docs, but makes it much clearer which is a package and which is the instance, while avoiding the need for a custom `.use` which I think could easily be confused with an official API.

In the future this will also make it easier for us to support `import { Controller } from 'stimulus'` in ES modules.

Author: I'm confused by this. 

All the documentation I've read uses `window.Stimus` as the application instance and never `window.stimulusApp`. 

https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/handbook/installing#using-other-build-systems

Originally I had lowercase `window.application` for the instance (early PRs) and you advised this should follow the docs and be `window.Stimulus`.

I'm not sure what to do with exposing a base a `Controller`, I've thought about this a fair bit and tried the docs with a lot of variants of this and `Stimulus.use.Controller` felt the simplest. 

I agree we would love to see this as an es6 import but that's a while away and won't work with widjet media JS scripts. 

If you're pretty set on not having anything else on the application that may be a 'box' for us to put custom stuff in, maybe some other ideas;

- expose it as a standalone global
- expose it on the bare stimulus application instance

I'm just trying to be aware of the spectrum of users of this stuff but understand the goal of not confusing our Stimulus usage with the core docs.

Author: Have opted for your suggestion Thibaud, scrapping the `createController` util completely so we can just expose the module and then the application instance.

I would like `window.app` or `window.application` but will update the code to be `window.stimulusApp` as recommended. My reasoning is that `app` is shorter but I understand this may confuse.

You need to first create a custom [Stimulus Controller](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/controllers). This can be done in two main ways, depending on your set-up:

1. Create a **custom Class** that extends the base `window.Stimulus.use.Controller` using class inheritance. If you are using a build tool you can extend `import { Controller } from '@hotwired/stimulus';`.

> 2. If you are unable to work with classes, build one with `window.Stimulus.use.createController` which accepts **an object using the [method definitions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Method_definitions) approach**, with a special `STATIC` property for static properties.

Reviewer 3: I’d rather we remove this to be honest. ES6 classes are a good 8 years old and weren’t particularly complex to understand even back then. The more modern `static` syntax isn’t that much harder to understand and has been around for a while too.

Author: No problems, I think there may be an edge case here and there that will warrant the usage of this object until. However, it's probably just confusing to have this documented here.

Author: Ignoring edge cases, if devs get stuck we can re-add this later or provide some example code for a work around.

Once you have created your custom controller, you will need to [register your Stimulus controllers manually](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/controllers#registering-controllers-manually) via the `window.Stimulus.register` method.

#### A simple example

First, create your HTML so that appears somewhere within the Wagtail admin.

```html
<!-- Will log 'My controller has connected: hi' to the console -->
<div data-controller="my-controller">Hi</div>
<!-- Will log 'My controller has connected: hello' to the console, with the span element-->
<div data-controller="my-controller">
    Hello
    <span data-my-controller-target="label"></span>
</div>
```

Second, create a JavaScript file that will contain your Controller code.
This Controller logs a simple message on `connect`, which is once the Controller has been created and connected to a HTML element with the matching `data-controller` attribute.

```javascript
// myapp/static/js/example.js

// 1. With classes

> (() => {

Reviewer 3: IMO showing this with a IIFE / proper closure should be out of scope for our docs. All those examples would be clearer without the extra level of indentation and JS idioms.

Author: Agreed, removing, may pollute globals if done without the function wrapper but not a problem for simplicity.

```python
# myapp/wagtail_hooks.py
from django.templatetags.static import static
from django.utils.safestring import mark_safe

from wagtail import hooks

@hooks.register('insert_global_admin_js')
def global_admin_js():
    return mark_safe(
        f'<script src="{static("js/example.js")}"></script>',
    )
```

You should now be able to refresh your admin page that was showing the HTML and see two logs in the console.

#### A word count controller example without a build system

This is a more complex example, we will create a Controller that adds a small `output` element next to the controlled `input` element that shows a count of how many words have been typed.

```javascript
// myapp/static/js/word-count-controller.js
// By passing the `window.Stimulus` to the immediate function call we can have simpler code
((Stimulus) => {
    class WordCountController extends Stimulus.use.Controller {
        static values = { max: { default: 10, type: Number } };

        connect() {
            this.setupOutput();
            this.updateCount();
        }

        setupOutput() {
            if (this.output) return;
            const template = document.createElement('template');

>             template.innerHTML = `<output name='word-count' for='${this.element.id}' style='float: right;'></output>`;

Reviewer 3: I think we should avoid inline styles in example code in the spirit of CSP compatibility.

```python
# models.py
from django import forms

from wagtail.admin.panels import FieldPanel
from wagtail.models import Page

class BlogPage(Page):
    # ...
    content_panels = Page.content_panels + [
        FieldPanel('subtitle', classname="full"),
        FieldPanel(
            'introduction',
            classname="full",
            widget=forms.TextInput(
                attrs={
                    'data-controller': 'word-count',
                    # allow the max number to be determined with attributes
                    # note we can use Python values here, Django will handle the string conversion (including escaping if applicable)
                    'data-word-count-max-value': 5,
                    # decide when you want the count to update with data-action
                    # (e.g. 'blur->word-count#updateCount' will only update when field loses focus)
                    'data-action': 'word-count#updateCount paste->word-count#updateCount',
                }
            )
        ),
    #...
```

> This next code snippet shows a slightly more advanced version of the `insert_editor_js` hook usage which is set up to easily append additional scripts for future controllers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This next code snippet shows a more advanced version of the `insert_editor_js` hook usage which is set up to append additional scripts for future controllers.
```

```python
# wagtail_hooks.py
from django.utils.html import format_html_join
from django.templatetags.static import static

from wagtail import hooks

@hooks.register('insert_editor_js')
def editor_js():
    # add more controller code as needed
    js_files = ['js/word-count-controller.js',]
    return format_html_join('\n', '<script src="{0}"></script>',
        ((static(filename),) for filename in js_files)
    )
```

> You should be able to see that on your Blog Page, all introduction fields will now have a small `output` element showing the count and max words being used.

Reviewer 3: Wouldn’t there only be one field?

```suggestion
You should be able to see that on your Blog Page, the introduction field will now have a small `output` element showing the count and max words being used.
```

Or this needs to say "blog pages".

> #### A word count controller example with a build system

Reviewer 3: This strikes me as way too much information compared to what we definitely need to convey here:

- Use Wagtail’s Stimulus package with our global variable(s) if possible, or your own copy of `@hotwired/stimulus` if needed.
- Make sure to use a build target higher than ES5

    // ... the same as above
}

window.Stimulus.register('word-count', WordCountController);
```

-   How you import the script will depend on your build solution, but a similar `wagtail_hooks.py` approach can be used.
-   Using the data attributes in your `FieldPanel`'s `widget` will work exactly the same.

#### Additional tips for bundling

You may want to avoid bundling Stimulus with your JavaScript output, you will need to look at how your build system can support this. You may also need to ensure your target bundle is ES2015 or above to be able to correctly extend the global base Controller class.

For bundler-specific handling of external dependencies or aliasing, see the following links.

-   [Vite library mode](https://vitejs.dev/guide/build.html#library-mode), which uses Rollup configuration
-   [Rollup external](https://rollupjs.org/configuration-options/#external) and [Rollup output globals](https://rollupjs.org/configuration-options/#output-globals)
-   [Webpack externals](https://webpack.js.org/configuration/externals/)
-   [Parcel aliases](https://parceljs.org/features/dependency-resolution/#aliases)

### Using an existing Stimulus controller in HTML

```{warning}

> While many Stimulus controllers are in use, this doesn't imply stable and documented usage is supported for all.

Reviewer 3: This – and below "Any built-in admin Stimulus Controller can be used via the Stimulus data attributes." –  is the kinds of statements I don’t see working too well for us. I’d rather we specifically list which controllers should be available for reuse, document those, and keep their API stable.

Author: I will just remove this whole section, I am not sure it's worth pushing this for the initial documentation. I agree that we need to be careful here with what we document and based on other PRs it's more likely we will expose (and document) a Django widget, Panel or even template tag before we document too many 'low level' implementation items like this.

```

> The Stimulus approach aligns with this philosophy by relying on data attributes that can be often set when declaring Django Widgets and Wagtail Panels in Python or the HTML templates.

Reviewer 3: I’m not clear which philosophy we’re referring to here?

Author: Will remove this, along with the section, but agree that the term philosophy is not really suitable.

> For commonly used Controllers there may already be a Django widget or `FieldPanel` approach that supports your requirements already.

Reviewer 3: The TitleCase "Controller" is confusing to me, should this not be lowercase?

Author: Agreed, have updated them all to simply 'controller'.

All Wagtail's Controllers have identifiers that are prefixed with `w-`.

#### Examples of using the `w-progress` Controller

The `w-progress` Controller is used to help the user avoid clicking the same button multiple times when there may be some delayed behaviour required. Custom usage of this is supported for usage within the admin interface.

-   `<button ... data-w-progress-duration-value="500" ...>` - custom duration can be declared on the element
-   `<button ... class="custom-button" data-w-progress-active-class="custom-button--busy" ...>` - custom 'active' class to replace the default `button-longrunning-active` (must be a single string without spaces)
-   `<button ... ><strong data-w-progress-target="label">{% trans 'Create' %}</strong></button>` - any element can be the button label (not just `em`)
-   `<button ... data-action="w-progress#activate focus->w-progress#activate" ...>` - any event can be used to trigger the in-progress behaviour
-   `<button ... data-action="w-progress#activate:once" ...>` - only trigger the progress behaviour once

> -   `<button ... data-action="readystatechange@document->w-progress#activate:once" data-w-progress-duration-value="5000" disabled ...>` - disabled on load (once JS starts) and becomes enabled after 5s duration

Reviewer 3: It’s not clear to me in what scenarios this is useful?

Author: As above, will remove this whole section, needs more intentional guidance and we may never want/need to document this low level kind of usage.

> ### Debugging & error handling

Author: Fair enough, will remove for now, if questions come up we can append a 'more links' section here in the future. Otherwise, the Stimulus docs has all of this.

For simple debugging, you can enable the [Stimulus debug mode](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/handbook/installing#debugging).

```javascript
window.Stimulus.debug = true;
```

You can use also the built-in [Stimulus error callback](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/handbook/installing#error-handling) for more robust error handling.

```javascript
window.onerror = console.error;
```

### Testing your Controllers

> Wagtail uses an out-of-the-box Stimulus application instance, you should be able to write your tests with your package.json installation of Stimulus without issue.

Reviewer 3: I don’t understand what "out-of-the-box" means here?

Author: Removing this, devs can work this out themselves, but agree this line was a bit confusing.

You should not need to mock the `Stimulus.use.Controller`, it's best you write your Controllers as extending `import {Controller} from '@hotwired/stimulus';` and then use any build tooling to redirect this to the global scope in production builds.

### Advanced Stimulus overrides

While these kinds of overrides are supported as a last-ditch method to fully customise behaviour, writing this kind of code will require you to understand the existing implementations and support the JavaScript on your own. it's also important to note that the maintenance burden will be on your project to ensure that any functionality added or changes to controller identifiers are supported.

If you find yourself reaching for this to fix a bug, please take the time to raise this issue on the Wagtail repository with your functional workaround.

Similarly, if some common Stimulus Controller usage would be helpful for the community, such as additional values, targets, DOM events or methods, please raise an issue with the suggestion.

For additional guidance on building Stimulus controllers, you can view the [](ui_guidelines_stimulus) aimed at Wagtail contributors.

> #### Registering a custom Stimulus application instance

Author: agreed, removing.

One of the simplest ways to add behaviour on top of Wagtail's existing Controllers is to create your Stimulus application.
This is useful if you want to append to the existing behaviour of known Controllers.
Please note that non-blocking (async) errors will be thrown and shown in the console if methods are triggered by Stimulus actions if the method doesn't exist.

In the example below we can attach, but not override, custom behaviour to the `w-dismissible` methods.

```javascript
((Stimulus) => {
    const StimulusExtra = Stimulus.start(); // start will instantiate the class and return its new instance
    class SlugCheckController extends Stimulus.use.Controller {
        compare() {
            // noop
        }
        slugify() {
            window.myCustomChecks.validate(this.element);
        }
        urlify() {
            window.myCustomChecks.validate(this.element);
        }
    }
    StimulusExtra.register('w-slug', SlugCheckController);
})(window.Stimulus);
```

> #### Extending an existing Stimulus controller

Author: Agreed, removing.

Stimulus' only documented way of retrieving a Controller constructor is via the [`getControllerForElementAndIdentifier`](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/controllers#directly-invoking-other-controllers) method on the application.
You can also retrieve all registered Controllers via `window.Stimulus.controllers`, but this approach isn't officially supported by Stimulus.

Once you have the Controller class, you can use `window.Stimulus.unload` to remove the registration of the existing one and then replace it with your custom Controller class using `window.Stimulus.register`.

Here is a basic example of this override.

```javascript
(() => {
    const identifier = 'w-slug';
    const element = document.querySelector(`[data-controller="${identifier}"]`);

    if (!element) return;

    const SlugController = window.Stimulus.getControllerForElementAndIdentifier(
        element,
        identifier,
    );

    class CustomSlugController extends SlugController {
        slugify() {
            // custom url slug
        }
        urlify() {
            // custom url slug
        }
    }
    Stimulus.register('w-slug', CustomSlugController);
})();
```

> #### Completely overriding existing admin behaviour of Stimulus controllers

Author: Agreed, removing section.

You should not need to mock the `Stimulus.use.Controller`, it is best you write your Controllers as extending `import {Controller} from '@hotwired/stimulus';` and then use any build tooling to redirect this to the global in production builds.

### Advanced Stimulus overrides

While these kinds of overrides are supported as a last ditch method to fully customise behaviour, writing this knd of code will require you to understand the existing implementations and support the JavaScript on your own. It is also important to note that the maintenance burden will be on your project to ensure that any functionality added or changes to controller identifiers are supported.

If you find yourself reaching for this to fix a bug, please ensure an issue is raised on the Wagtail repository with your functional work around.

Similarly, if some common Stimulus Controller usage would be helpful for the community, such as additional values, targets, DOM events or methods, please raise an issue with the suggestion.

```{warning}
Usage of `class ... extends` from the globally provided `window.Stimulus.use.Controller` cannot be done outside of code that is also bundled to ES5.

> ```

Reviewer 5: This seems to be repeated in the document, is it intentional?

Author: Thanks, this line was actually incorrect (before we moved to ES6+ targets), so I have removed it.

This is useful if you want to append to existing behaviour of known Controllers.
Please note that non-blocking (async) errors will be thrown and shown in the console if methods are triggered by Stimulus actions if the method does not exist.

In the example below we can attach, but not override, custom behaviour to the `w-dismissible` methods.

```javascript
((Stimulus) => {
    const StimulusExtra = Stimulus.start(); // start will instantiate the class and return its new instance
    class SlugCheckController extends Stimulus.use.Controller {
        compare() {
            // noop
        }
        slugify() {
            window.myCustomChecks.validate(this.element);
        }
        urlify() {
            window.myCustomChecks.validate(this.element);
        }
    }
    StimulusExtra.register('w-slug', SlugCheckController);
})(window.Stimulus);
```

#### Extending an existing Stimulus controller

For more extreme customisations it is possible to retrieve an existing registered Controller from the Stimulus application instance. This can be extended (using ES2015 class inheritance) and this extended controller registered again with the same identifier.

> There may also be some side effects of built in controllers being registered, depending on the timing of your JavaScript code event firing.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
There may also be some side effects of built-in controllers being registered, depending on the timing of your JavaScript code event firing.
```

Here is a basic example of this override.

```javascript
(() => {
    const identifier = 'w-slug';
    const element = document.querySelector(`[data-controller="${identifier}"]`);

    if (!element) return;

    const SlugController = window.Stimulus.getControllerForElementAndIdentifier(
        element,
        identifier,
    );

    class CustomSlugController extends SlugController {
        slugify() {
            // custom url slug
        }
        urlify() {
            // custom url slug
        }
    }
    Stimulus.register('w-slug', CustomSlugController);
})();
```

#### Completely overriding existing admin behaviour of Stimulus controllers

Wagtail also allows you to register a controller against its main application instance, see the examples above or the events reference for these events.

You can completely override the built in controllers via using the same `identifier` (usually starts with `w-`) and registering your own controller with that identifier.

It is important to note that your custom controller will need to re-implement the existing methods or you will get console errors when these are called.

> There may also be some side effects of built in controllers being registered, depending on the timing of your JavaScript code event firing.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
There may also be some side effects of built-in controllers being registered, depending on the timing of your JavaScript code event firing.
```

Side note: these two last parts seems a lot alike, I wonder if it is useful to keep both.
